```
Author: Garrett Berg (github.com/vitiral)
Perspective: Toll Bansha
Other characters: Maye Johnson, Taylor (Tay) Hill
Time period: 5 months After Event
Primary Location: Civboot A
```

I've been secretly making my own video game lately. The Civboot was packed
with petabytes of textbooks, educational videos, scientific journals, every
published book in existence, utility programs and libraries, proprietary
mechanical CAD layouts and a million other things. It was all encrypted behind
a password, the only one of us who knew that password was Tay. Well, the world
has ended and the treasure trove can finally be pilfered. The bastards didn't
include any video games though.

Okay fine, I've got a problem. A few days after Maye and I started getting out
of our funk she told me she needed some space. It wasn't my fault and it wasn't
anything I'd done. That's fine, I get it. But I feel like I need people more
than ever, like loneliness is going to swallow me up. Good thing this was
basically my entire childhood and I have extremely reliable methods for
ignoring it. Just play video games. And if that doesn't work, just play more
video games.

Only problem is there are no video games. Good thing I have a PhD in software
engineering and our fearless leader Tay has tasked me with trying to make
contact with the other Civboots, an entirely impossible task that could take me
anywhere from months to the end of the human race. The world has been destroyed
and I'm putting off essential work to distract myself from my own emotions. If
the majority of people did the exact same thing when the world was alive and
vibrant, who can really judge me?

Also, making a game is an excuse to better understand Civboot's software and
hardware. It's seriously got some wonky ideas. It's been around for a while,
just search for [Civboot.org](http://civboot.org) in your internet archive if
you haven't read about it. At the lowest level it basically eschews all modern
convenience to build up an extremely basic language called Forth in almost pure
machine code. It uses this to create another programming language named fngi.
Fngi is super low level but very extensible, not only in what it can build but
in the fact that it can modify itself. All the text-based interfaces like
PAMELA are actually implemented as a _library_ which altered the fngi language
itself to behave more like a command line than a programming language. Smart.

I'm going to tell you about my game because it's my journal and so I can do
whatever I want. You play as a princess who's crown has been stolen by evil
cyborg pigs. Your crown is seriously magical and has made the Cyborg Pig Lord
and his minions super powerful. The whole game is created using only Civboot
technology, so the graphics are terrible. Think original Mario or Zelda or
something but worse. The game is basically impossible to beat, and every time
you die you start from the beginning. Every time I beat the game I actually add
new enemies or mechanics to make it harder. It's an exercise in virtual
masochism.

Anyway, to spoil the story: it turns out the Pig Lord is actually your Father
the King who stole your crown and mixed it's power with cyborg technology and
genetic engineering to create his pig army out of your kingdom's population. So
by winning the game you are actually killing your father and destroying your
own kingdom. So you've recovered your crown, but how can you be a princess
without a kingdom? Pretty depressing, but violence and tragedy is cathartic.

Seriously, communicating with the other Civboots is completely impossible.
Don't get me wrong, I'm glad Tay's in charge again. Even through this
depressive episode, I've still been doing real work like harvesting the farms
and doing maintenance. I've even learned a bit more about our mechanical
systems, although I'm still worried about what happens if we encounter a real
problem that doesn't involve reading a log and bending a piece of metal back
into place. The thought of it stresses me out and makes me not want to think
about it any more. Which means I'll play more of my video game or add a new
enemy.

Back to the problem of communicating with other Civboots. We're supposed to
have a dedicated satellite network solely for Civboots and other NASA assets.
This system is supposed to be completely resilient to failure. I guess whoever
programmed the nuclear response system also programmed our satellites, because
when I try to connect all I get is an error that it can't find any name-servers
and it refuses to do anything else. Of course it can't find any name-servers,
the fucking world has ended. Someone forgot to put the backup routines in
place. This is why I hate modern software and am starting to respect Civboot
more and more. Modern software is a stack of cards; and the table it's built on
is made of wet graham crackers half-baked by unpaid engineers for fun. As
PAMELA showed me, the latter description is Civboot's _entire_ software stack,
but at least Civboot is transparent about it and shows you how to bake your own
graham crackers.

Normally at this point I would just throw the satellite connection away and hook
up a HAM radio. Problem is, we are 1,000 meters underground and nobody thought
to have a surface HAM radio for us to use. HAM radios are really cool and can
send signals that bounce off the stratosphere to travel around the entire
earth. What they cannot do is travel through 1,000 meters of rock. Even if I
could build a HAM radio, nobody is going to step foot outside for it to get a
signal.

So like I said, completely impossible. I'm going to finish making this cool
cyborg pig with a rocket launcher and then do some software testing for the
next four or so hours.

[Next segment](./comms2.md)
