```
Author: Garrett Berg (github.com/vitiral)
Perspective: Toll Bansha
Time period: 2 months Before Event
Primary Location: Surface, Civboot A
```

Toll took one last long look at the sky, the clouds drifting lazily across it's
blue expanse, before steping into the ragged looking mining elevator. For the next
two years he was going to be a new resident in NASA's midwestern Civboot,
"Civboot Alpha". One of six international Civboots, it was burried under 1000
meters of rock in an abandoned mine for the purpose of replicating the
experience of the Martian colony, to validate new technology which would soon
be shipped to the Mars Civboot. The Mars Civboot was made up of more than fifty
people from four different nations: the United States, China, Russia and
Europe. The US had two terrestial Civboots and each other nation had one.

The mining elevator gave a lurch and started to descend. The man escorting
Toll, named John, was in his upper fifties. An old NASA Test Engineer who
advanced up the tech ladder and was now near retirement, he now worked on the
Mars Civboot project and helped bring new recruits to the test sites. Toll
had been at NASA for almost three years but never worked with John. Toll had
been working on the gravitational and radio telescopy array of more than four
thousand satelites in orbit around the Sun. By utilizing all four thoousand
satelites as one gigantic telescope, spread out with a surface area greater
than Jupiter, it enabled extreme precision gravitational and radio wave
measurements of any point in the sky.

"May I ask why the change in career?" John inquired. Toll had requested the
transfer to Civboot six months ago. Somewhere during gradschool he had felt a
sense of emptiness and lack of purpose. He thought that if he just pushed
through it he would be fine after he got his PhD, but the emptiness never left
him. Nor did it leave him when he got the job at NASA.

"Since I was a child I always wanted to be an astronought and visit other
planets. Performing well in this program is supposed to be a good way to get
your place on Mars."

"I've lead many future Mars colonists down this elevator it is true. I've also
taken many people nearly driven crazy from isolation back up. Lucky for them
actually; Mars would have been worse. Far worse. On Mars you can 'check in any
time you like but you can never leave'" he finished with a flourish, quoting
the old song and giving a chuckle to himself. It wasn't quite true, there were
return flights from Mars. But they were only every two years during the launch
window, just before the Earth-Mars opposition when the two planets were
closest.

Toll nodded. As part of his three month Civboot training he had been put in
complete isolation for two weeks, followed by a full psych evaluation. He had
always been an introvtered person and did not have many problems with being
shut away with books and a laptop. He didn't think he would be someone to snap
down here. Then again two years was a long time.

The terrestial Civboots were each staffed with five to ten people. Civboot
Alpha would house six once Toll arrived. He had read the personel files of the
other five residents; there were to be three women and three men for at least
the next year. Each resident brought a specific expertise to analyze new
Civboot technology. The experts included a medical doctor who was also the site
lead, a mechanical engineer, two bio engineers, a computer hardware engineer
and himself: a software engineer with a PhD in Computer Science.

Not that his PhD would help much for Civboot. His expertise was mostly in
theoretical mathematical calculations on modern hardware. Civboot was an
entirely different beast, made almost entirely from computer parts that could
have been built in 1980. This was a feature not a bug. Civboot, meaning
"Civilizational bootstrapper", had all the tools and technology to re-build
itself from scratch, including all the computer chips, machines and materials
necessary. For the Mars colony to be able to survive the two year transfer
windows and six month flight for new supplies, it was necessary for it to be
able to replace, modify or re-engineer nearly every part within it. Civboot was
the only technology stack small and simple enough to be be understood and
replicated by as few as fifty experts.

There were few other words between them as they rode the elevator down. Down.
Down. When they reached the bottom John spoke "Now pay attention and stay
close. The Civboot is actually hidden in a maze of tunnels down here. The
beurocrats at NASA think it is some kind of secret bunker which could save the
human race in the event of catastrophe, or at least that's what people want now
a days. I say it's all bullshit -- if the surface bit the bucket then the
Civboots would be soon to follow. But what do I know."

They walked through a few tunnels, Toll trying to remember them. "So it's
hidden in case what... in case there is a social breakdown? They want the
Civboot to be able to survive an technological dark age or something?"

"Ya, bunch of bullshit. They gave the same justification for the huge
expenditure on the Mars colony. Back in the good ole' days we spent money on
science and exploration for the sake of knowledge. Now everyone needs to
have a backup. Bunch of hulabaloo, there's no apocalypse comming." He paused,
giving a wink "But if there were, you would be in the best place for it."

They arrived at the Civboot, a rusty flat iron door cut directly into the rock
wall. John waved his ID card in front of a discolored rock and Toll could hear
gears grinding behind it before it opened.

"Well that's the end of the road for me" John said, handing Toll his personal
bag and shaking his hand. "I wish you the best of luck down here. You let us
know if there's anything we can do for you. Chances are, we can't." He gave a
chuckle.

*Bastard* thought Toll, but he thanked him anyway as he walked through the
doors.

